[Docs] Improve documentation around building a new Ocean integration (#1395)
port-labs/ocean: docs/framework-guides/docs/getting-started/installing-ocean-cli-and-scaffolding-an-integration.md

---
sidebar_position: 1
---

import CodeBlock from '@theme/CodeBlock';

# 🚀 Installing Ocean CLI and Scaffolding an Integration

> In this part of the guide, you'll learn how to **install** the Ocean CLI and **scaffold** a new integration
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section of the guide, you'll discover how to **install** the Ocean CLI and **scaffold** a new integration

```

## Requirements

> You should have Python 3.12 installed on your machine as stated in the previous section. If you don't have Python installed, you can download it from the [official Python website](https://www.python.org/downloads/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ensure Python 3.12 is installed on your computer, as mentioned in the previous section. If it's not yet installed, you can download it from the [official Python website](https://www.python.org/downloads/).
```

## Setting up the environment
Integrations for Port are developed using the Ocean framework. The Ocean framework provides a set of tools and libraries to help you develop, test, and deploy integrations to Port. In addition, integrations are usually developed within the [Ocean monorepo](https://github.com/port-labs/ocean/), which provides a set of automations on GitHub CI environment including testing, linting, and a Docker image build.

> Standalone development for integrations (private integrations) are not fully supported yet, but you can still develop integrations standalone and use them internally before contributing them to the Port catalog. This guide will focus on developing integrations within the Ocean monorepo.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Standalone development for integrations (private integrations) are not fully supported yet, but you can still develop integrations standalone and use them privately without necessarily contributing them to Port's Ocean integration catalog. This guide will focus on developing integrations within the Ocean monorepo.
```

> Choosing to develop an integration within the Ocean monorepo has some advantages:
> - Contributing an integration to the Port catalog requires it to be developed within the Ocean monorepo. Hence, if you plan to contribute to Port's catalog of integrations, you should develop it within the Ocean monorepo.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Choosing to develop an integration within the Ocean monorepo has some advantages:
- Contributing an integration to the Port catalog requires it to be developed within the Ocean monorepo. Hence, if you plan to contribute to Port's Ocean integration catalog, you should develop it within the Ocean monorepo.
```

- The Ocean monorepo provides a set of automations on GitHub CI environment including testing, linting, and building the integration Docker image that are not available in standalone development, or you would have to set up yourself.

> 

Reviewer: Talk less about standalone, we don't want to provide to much hint on a possibility that isn't properly documented

🌊 Ahoy, Captain! Your project is ready to set sail into the vast ocean of possibilities!
Here are your next steps:

⚓️ Install necessary packages: Run cd ./integrations/github && make install && . .venv/bin/activate to install all required packages for your
project.
⚓️ Copy example env file: Run cp .env.example .env  and update your integration's configuration in the .env file.
⚓️ Set sail with Ocean: Run ocean sail to run the project using Ocean.
⚓️ Smooth sailing with Make: Alternatively, you can run make run ./integrations/github to launch your project using Make.
```

</details>

## Test to see if the integration is working
To test to see that the integration is working, we will initialize the environment variables by copying the `.env.example` file to `.env` and updating the configuration in the `.env` file.

<details>

<summary><b>Setting up the environment variables (Click to expand)</b></summary>

```bash showLineNumbers
$ cd ./github # or cd ./integrations/github if you are in the monorepo
$ cp .env.example .env
```

</details>

Next, activate the virtual environment and run the integration:

<details>

<summary><b>Running the integration (Click to expand)</b></summary>

> ```bash showLineNumbers

Reviewer: This applies to all console related outputs

---
sidebar_position: 1
---

import CodeBlock from '@theme/CodeBlock';

# 🚀 Installing Ocean CLI and Scaffolding an Integration

In this part of the guide, you'll learn how to **install** the Ocean CLI and **scaffold** a new integration

## Requirements
You should have Python 3.12 installed on your machine as stated in the previous section. If you don't have Python installed, you can download it from the [official Python website](https://www.python.org/downloads/).

## Setting up the environment
While integrations are usually developed within the [Ocean monorepo](https://github.com/port-labs/ocean/), you can also develop integrations standalone. If you plan to publish your integration to the Port catalog, you should develop it within the Ocean monorepo. Go to the [Monorepo development](#monorepo-development) section to learn how to set up the Ocean monorepo.

### Standalone Development

> #### Installing the Ocean CLI

Reviewer: Talk about why one would need or should choose Standalone

  [6/10] release_date (2025-02-11):
  [7/10] is_private_integration [y/n] (y): n
  [8/10] port_client_id (you can find it using:
https://docs.getport.io/build-your-software-catalog/custom-integration/api/#find-your-port-credentials): <your-port-client-id>
  [9/10] port_client_secret (you can find it using:
https://docs.getport.io/build-your-software-catalog/custom-integration/api/#find-your-port-credentials): <your-port-client-secret>
  [10/10] is_us_region [y/n] (n): n

🌊 Ahoy, Captain! Your project is ready to set sail into the vast ocean of possibilities!
Here are your next steps:

⚓️ Install necessary packages: Run cd ./github && make install && . .venv/bin/activate to install all required packages for your project.
⚓️ Copy example env file: Run cp .env.example .env  and update your integration's configuration in the .env file.
⚓️ Set sail with Ocean: Run ocean sail to run the project using Ocean.
⚓️ Smooth sailing with Make: Alternatively, you can run make run ./github to launch your project using Make.
```

</details>

### Monorepo Development
Choosing to develop an integration within the Ocean monorepo has some advantages:

> - Publishing an integration to the Port catalog requires it to be developed within the Ocean monorepo. Hence, if you plan to publish your integration, you should develop it within the Ocean monorepo.

Reviewer: Lets communicate this as `Contributing`, instead of `Publishing`

<summary><b>Integration structure (Click to expand)</b></summary>

```console
$ tree

github/
├── .port        # A folder containing configurations for the integration. See below for more details
├── changelog # A directory containing automatically generated changelog files when the integration is ready to be published
├── CHANGELOG.md    # A file containing the changelog of the integration
├── CONTRIBUTING.md # A file containing the contributing guidelines for the integration
├── debug.py    # Entry point for debugging the integration
├── main.py     # Entry point for the integration. This is where resync functions to export data to Port are defined
├── Makefile    # A file containing the commands to run the integration, it is a symlink to the Makefile in the Ocean library
├── poetry.toml # Poetry configurations for the integration's virtual environment
├── pyproject.toml      # Dependency and project metadata for the integration
├── README.md       # Description of the integration
├── sonar-project.properties    # SonarQube configurations for the integration
└── tests       # A directory containing tests for the integration
    ├── __init__.py
    └── test_sample.py
```

> </details>

Author: What difference specifically? This structure is about the newly created integration

> </details>

Reviewer: depending on whether the user is scaffolding a mono repo or a standalone, There are some files that are not present in the other, for instance, Dockerfile is present when you opt for a standalone , but not in a mono-repo

> </details>

Author: The Dockerfile isn't actually present in a standalone installation, and also not present in a monorepo

# 🚀 Installing Ocean CLI and Scaffolding an Integration

In this section of the guide, you'll discover how to **install** the Ocean CLI and **scaffold** a new integration

## Requirements
Ensure Python 3.12 is installed on your computer, as mentioned in the previous section. If it's not yet installed, you can download it from the [official Python website](https://www.python.org/downloads/).

## Setting up the environment
Integrations for Port are developed using the Ocean framework. The Ocean framework provides a set of tools and libraries to help you develop, test, and deploy integrations to Port. In addition, integrations are usually developed within the [Ocean monorepo](https://github.com/port-labs/ocean/), which provides a set of automations on GitHub CI environment including testing, linting, and a Docker image build.

> Private integrations are [not fully supported yet](../faq.md#can-i-create-a-private-integration-exclusively-for-my-organization), but you can still develop integrations and use them privately without necessarily contributing them to Port's Ocean integration. This guide will focus on developing integrations within the Ocean monorepo.

Reviewer: `Port's Ocean integration` is a single integration, `Port's Ocean integration catalog` references a collection/registry of integrations...
